= Parfait
== What is Parfait?

Parfait uses layers to simplify the creation and maintenance of your automated browser test suite.  

A typical automated test suite can be broken down into layers:

* A <b>workflow layer</b> on top, which dictates the user's path through the application.  Think in terms of verbs and user stories: "As a user, when I login, I expect to be taken to my home page."  The workflow layer cares about user actions and results, not about the mechanics of entering data into the browser.
* A <b>control layer</b> beneath, which defines the specific interactions between the user and the web page.  This control layer would be implemented in your favorite browser automation tool, e.g. Selenium, Watir, etc.  The control layer cares only about getting data into and out of specific fields on specific pages.

Parfait provides a layer between the two, offering a set of basic test directives which are easy to call by the workflow layer and providing a simple infrastructure for creation and maintenance of the control layer beneath.  

== How does Parfait work?

At the control layer, Parfait allows you to define four basic objects: Applications, Pages, Regions, and Controls.

=== Applications

An Application is the top layer of the Parfait object hierarchy.  It is simply a collection of Pages.

=== Pages

A Page is a collection of Controls and Regions that are presented on the same screen.  This could be an actual page, or a panel on the screen that is used throughout the application.

=== Regions

A Region is a specific section on the screen.  Parfait does not require Regions to be defined, but they can be helpful when there are multiple similar controls on the screen, like in a list.

A Region can contain Controls or other Regions.

=== Controls

A Control is a single interaction point on a web page.  There can be data controls like links, text fields, and pulldown menus, as well as non-data controls like links and buttons.  All controls have a set of directives associated with them to enable easier implementation of your test automation.

==== Data Controls

Each data control is built around the two primary directives +get+ and +set+:

- +get+ - reads and returns the current value from the Control
- +set+ - uses the Control to set a new value.  

Once these primary directives are defined, Parfait puts them together to build the following directives for free:

- +retrieve+ - Reads and returns the current value from the Control.  Does not log anything.  (This is the user-callable version of +get+.)
- +update+ - Uses the Control to set a new value.  Logs the value of the Control both before and after the change for auditing purposes.
- +confirm+ - Tests the value of the Control, returning +true+ if the input matches the value of the Control and +false+ otherwise.  Does not log anything.
- +verify+  = Test the value of the Control, raising an exception if the input does not match the value of the Control.  Returns +true+ otherwise.  Logs successes for auditing purposes.

==== Non-Data Controls

Each non-data control is built upon a single +goto+ directive:

- +goto+ - selects or clicks the control to navigate elsewhere in the application

From this directive, a secondary +navigate+ directive is built:

- +navigate+ - Uses the Control to navigate.  Logs its action.  (This is the user-callable version of +goto+.)

== How do I get started with Parfait?

The code examples used below are all taken from the Parfait repository in the +examples/example1+ directory.  In this directory, we will be automating control of the +index.html+ page.

Remember, Parfait breaks the code into two layers, so we'll define those layers in different files.  The workflow layer will be defined in +demo.rb+, but let's start by using Parfait to define the control layer in +page.rb+.

=== Define a Page

Our first step is to define a page.  We'll name it "Sample Page" to match the name of the page we're controlling:

  sample_page = Parfait::Page.new(:name => "Sample Page")

Next we should add the page to our application:  

  sample_page.add_to_application("Sample App")

Since our application has not yet been defined, this call will actually create the Parfait::Application object under the covers.  This may seem a bit backward, but it allows a whole bunch of Parfait Page definitions to be pre-loaded in our test suite without having to worry about passing around an Application object.  We'll be able to get an instance of this object later on in the workflow layer.

=== Add some Controls

Our sample web page starts with a set of radio buttons.  A data control like this can be defined in three steps.

First, we create a Control object:

  party = Parfait::Control.new(:name => "Party", :logtext => "political party")

Next, we add this object to the Page:

  party.add_to_page(sample_page)

Then we define +get+ and +set+ directives for the control.  For the +get+, no parameters are necessary and the code passed in should return the value of the control:

  party.add_get {
    retval = nil
    retval = Parfait::browser.div(:id => "radio-example").radio(:value => "Federalist").set? ? "Federalist" : retval
    retval = Parfait::browser.div(:id => "radio-example").radio(:value => "Republicrat").set? ? "Republicrat" : retval
    retval = Parfait::browser.div(:id => "radio-example").radio(:value => "Know-Nothing").set? ? "Know-Nothing" : retval
    retval
  }

For the +set+ directive, a single value is taken as input, followed by an optional hash.  In most cases, we can ignore the hash.

  party.add_set { |input|
    Parfait::browser.div(:id => "radio-example").radio(:value => input).set
  }

Now that the +get+ and +set+ directives are defined for this control, Parfait will use them to build +update+, +retrieve+, +confirm+, and +verify+ directives for you.  We'll use those in the workflow layer in a bit.

We also have a "Set My Party" button to add as a non-data Control.  Let's add that to our Page definition as well.  The difference with the non-data Control is that the only directive we set here is the +goto+ method:

  set_my_party = Parfait::Control.new(:name => "Set My Party", :logtext => "Set My Party button")
  
  set_my_party.add_to_page(sample_page)
  
  set_my_party.add_goto {
    Parfait::browser.button(:value => "Set My Party").click
  }

With a +goto+ directive defined, Parfait will build the +navigate+ directive from that code, allowing navigation with better logging.  Again, we'll see that when we code the workflow layer.

=== Working with Regions

When automating web pages, we often have to deal with repeated elements that are similar, or even identical.  Parfait allows the definition of Regions to focus on a specific entry in that list and then locate the common control from there.  Consider the list of presidents presented in +index.html+/.

We will define a Region to isolate information for a single president.  This wil allow us to easily get at the fields for that president with subsequent control definitions for that region.  First we can define the Region and add it to the Page.

  president_region = Parfait::Region.new(:name => "President")
  president_region.add_to_page(sample_page)

The key piece in defining the region is the filter, which reduces the scope Watir is looking at by starting with +Parfait::browser+, applying the filter and then calling +Parfait::filter_browser+ to store the reduced scope. 

The add_filter method will take a single parameter - if more are necessary, then a subfilter should be used instead.
  
  # Define a filter so that this region will allow focus on a single entry
  president_region.add_filter { |president_name|
    table_rows = Parfait::browser.div(:id => "presidents").trs
    table_rows.each do |tr|
      if tr.text =~ /#{president_name}/
        Parfait::filter_browser tr
        break
      end
    end
  }

With this filter defined, we can access the controls under each president much more easily.  Let's start with the nickname control:

  nickname = Parfait::Control.new(:name => "Nickname", :logtext => "president nickname")
  nickname.add_to_region(president_region)

  nickname.add_get {
    Parfait::browser.text_field.value
  }

  nickname.add_set { |input|
    Parfait::browser.text_field.set input
  }

Note that the +get+ and the +set+ rely on inheriting the filtered browser from the "President" region.  That means the Watir code can just assume that it's looking at a single table row.  Since this is the only text field within that row, no further specification is necessary than +Parfait::browser.text_field+ to access that control.

Similarly, the "Update Nickname" control can be defined:

  update_nickname = Parfait::Control.new(:name => "Set My Party", :logtext => "Set My Party button")
  
  update_nickname.add_to_region(president_region)
  
  update_nickname.add_goto {
    Parfait::browser.button(:value => "Update").click
  }

Finally, we can define the remaining two controls as well:

  biography = Parfait::Control.new(:name => "Biography", :logtext => "Biography link")
  
  biography.add_to_region(president_region)
  
  biography.add_goto {
    Parfait::browser.link(:text => "Biography").click
  }
  
  
  cabinet = Parfait::Control.new(:name => "Cabinet", :logtext => "Cabinet link")
  
  cabinet.add_to_region(president_region)
  
  cabinet.add_goto {
    Parfait::browser.link(:text => "Cabinet").click
  }

And that completes the Page definition.  Now on to the workflow layer.

=== Invoke the Workflow

To define the workflow layer, let's edit +demo.rb+.  First we need to require Watir and Parfait:

  require 'watir-webdriver'
  require 'parfait'
  
Next we want to include our page definition.

  require './page'

Then we can set up the browser, go to the sample page, and tell Parfait about it.  You'll want to adjust the directory here as necessary.

  browser = Watir::Browser.new
  browser.goto "file://#{ENV['HOME']}/git/parfait/examples/example1/index.html"
  
  Parfait::set_browser(browser)

Before we start using our directives, we also need to pass a logging routine to Parfait.  This routine just tells Parfait how to log a given string.  For our demonstration, we'll just print to stdout:

  Parfait::set_logroutine { |logstring|
    puts logstring
  }

And finally, let's get the Application we defined in +page.rb+ saved into an object:

  app = Parfait::Application.find("Sample App")

Now we can invoke directives!  With all the setup behind us, it's now pretty straightforward to manipulate the controls on this page.  Let's start by setting our party:

  app.page("Sample Page").control("Party").update "Republicrat"

Note that the logging for that call indicates both what the control contained previously as well as what it has been set to.

Any of the directives will work on this control.  If we want to verify that it is set as we requested, we can do that as well:

  app.page("Sample Page").control("Party").verify "Republicrat"

We can submit our change using the "Set My Party" button:

  app.page("Sample Page").control("Set My Party").navigate

Using the Region we defined, we can also easily manipulate controls within the table.  To change the nickname for John Adams, we can just target his table entry like this:

  app.page("Sample Page").region("President" => "John Adams").control("Nickname").update "Sammy's Bro"

Similarly, we can verify his nickname:

  app.page("Sample Page").region("President" => "John Adams").control("Nickname").verify "Sammy's Bro"

We can also use our Region to navigate to the biography for Thomas Jefferson:

  app.page("Sample Page").region("President" => "Thomas Jefferson").control("Biography").navigate

This is a simple example, but hopefully it demonstrates the power and flexibility Parfait gives you in managing controls and using them in the workflow layer of your test automation.

